# Fake news detection in Portuguese under large language model-generated content

This repository contains the dataset and code used in our study.

## Folder: [fake-news-generation](./fake-news-generation)

This folder contains the source code for the class used to generate synthetic fake news.

## Folder [data](./data/)

This folder contains the following subfolders:

- [data/Fake.Br-LLM](./data/Fake.Br-LLM): contains the training and test fake news generated by the LLM based on the Fake.Br corpus. The repository with the original news is available at [https://github.com/roneysco/Fake.br-Corpus](https://github.com/roneysco/Fake.br-Corpus).

    - Each line in the files `train.txt` and `test.txt` contains the name of a file from the original Fake.Br corpus, which forms the training and test sets for the experiments.

- [data/FakeTrueBR-LLM](./data/FakeTrueBR-LLM): contains the training and test fake news generated by the LLM based on the FakeTrueBR corpus. The repository with the original news is available at [https://github.com/jpchav98/FakeTrue.Br](https://github.com/jpchav98/FakeTrue.Br).

    - Each line in the files `train.txt` and `test.txt` corresponds to a line in the original CSV file of the FakeTrue.Br corpus (starting from 0).

If you use the synthetic variations of the datasets in your study, please refer to them as `Fake.Br-LLM` and `FakeTrue.BR-LLM`."

### LLM-generated fake news

The text files in [data/Fake.Br-LLM/test-fake-LLM](./data/Fake.Br-LLM/test-fake-LLM), [data/Fake.Br-LLM/train-fake-LLM](./data/Fake.Br-LLM/train-fake-LLM), [data/FakeTrueBR-LLM/test-fake-LLM](./data/FakeTrueBR-LLM/test-fake-LLM), and [data/FakeTrueBR-LLM/train-fake-LLM](./data/FakeTrueBR-LLM/train-fake-LLM) contain three key tags:

- `<originalText></originalText>`: contains the original true news article.
- `<syntheticText></syntheticText>`: contains the LLM-generated fake news article.
- `<changes></changes>`: contains an explanation requested from the LLM. In the prompt used to generate the fake news, we asked the LLM to list and explain the changes it made, detailing how these modifications contributed to transforming the news into fake news. This explanation is not used for classification purposes but was designed to facilitate human inspection.

For the experiments involving LLM-generated fake news, only the text inside the `<syntheticText></syntheticText>` tag was used.

**Important Note.** We manually inspected only the LLM-generated fake news in the test set. 

### Experiments with varying amounts of synthetic fake news

We conducted experiments where models were trained by mixing the training set with original fake news and varying amounts of synthetic data. To facilitate reproducibility, the data splits are provided below.

Within [data/Fake.Br-LLM](./data/Fake.Br-LLM) and [data/FakeTrue.Br-LLM](./data/FakeTrue.Br-LLM), there are two subfolders:

- `trainTestSplit_testLLMFakenews`: splits related to the test set that contains only fake news generated by LLMs.

- `trainTestSplit_testOriginalFakenews`: splits related to the test set that contains only original fake news.

Each folder contains CSV files named in the following format: `trainFakeOrigX.X_trainFakeLLMX.X_testFakeOrigX.X_testFakeLLMX.X`.

Here, X.X indicates the percentage of original fake news or LLM-generated fake news.

Each CSV file includes the following columns:

- `news_path`: relative path of the news article. If the folder name contains **orig**, this means the file is original and should be obtained in the original repository: [https://github.com/roneysco/Fake.br-Corpus](https://github.com/roneysco/Fake.br-Corpus) or [https://github.com/jpchav98/FakeTrue.Br](https://github.com/jpchav98/FakeTrue.Br). If the folder name constains **LLM**, it refers to an LLM-generated news file available in the corresponding LLM folder: [data/Fake.Br-LLM/test-fake-LLM](./data/Fake.Br-LLM/test-fake-LLM), [data/Fake.Br-LLM/train-fake-LLM](./data/Fake.Br-LLM/train-fake-LLM), [data/FakeTrue.Br-LLM/test-fake-LLM](./data/FakeTrue.Br-LLM/test-fake-LLM), or [data/FakeTrue.Br-LLM/train-fake-LLM](./data/FakeTrue.Br-LLM/train-fake-LLM).

- `Original_or_LLM`: indicates whether the news is LLM-generated or original

- `class`: indicates the class, which can be 1 (fake news) or 0 (true news)

- `setType`: indicates whether the file belongs to the training or test set


## BibTeX Entry

If you find our paper or data helpful, please cite our publication:

Silva, R. M., Amamou, H., Ferraz, L. B. S., da Silva, F. K. A., & Avila, A. R. (2025). Fake news detection in Portuguese under large language model-generated content. Journal of the Brazilian Computer Society, 1–18.

The BibTeX entry for the paper is provided below.

```
@article{2025_silva_fakeNews_LLM_JCBSJournal,
	 author = {Renato Moraes Silva and Hazem Amamou and 
               Lucca Baptista Silva Ferraz and Fabio Kauê Araujo da Silva and 
               Anderson Raymundo Avila},
	 title = {Fake News Detection in Portuguese Under Large Language Model-Generated Content},
	 journal = {Journal of the Brazilian Computer Society},
	 pages = {1--18},
	 year = {2025},
	 issn = {1678-4804}
}
```
